step-functions.md, before:

# Step Functions

---

- It is a Orchestration Service that allows you to model workflows as state machine
- Manages the state of the workflow, keeps track of the execution, scalable and resilient
  platform.
- Design state machine using JSON. Refer the spec [states-language](https://states-language.net/)
- Multiple executions of same state machine can be executed concurrently
- Start state machine:
  - ```javascript 1.8
    StepFunctions.startExecution(req).promise();
    ```
  - API Gateway
  - CloudWatch Events
- The states in the state machine can invoke Lambda function
- Step Functions can record upto 25K events in Execution Event History per execution

### Terminology

- Every time the execution moves on from one state to another, it's called a **state transition**
- Step Functions charges based on number of state transitions across all your state machines, including retries.
- 4,000 free state transitions per month and does not automatically expire at the end of your 12 month AWS Free Tier term, and is available to both existing and new AWS customers indefinitely.
- $0.025 per 1,000 state transitions. $25 for 1M state transitions. $0.000025 PER STATE TRANSITION
  THEREAFTER
- State Machine Definition is the workflow created using JSON spec
- State Machine status:
  - Running
  - Succeeded
  - Failed
  - Timeout
  - Aborted
- Each state machine has an unique ARN and IAM role which is needed to interact with Lambda and
  other AWS services
- Each execution has an unique ARN, start time, end time, input and output, status
- Each state in the execution has a status:
  - Success
  - Failed
  - Cancelled
  - In Progress
- Each state displays input, output, exception if any
- Each state can have Retry, Catch, Timeout configured in the workflow
- CloudWatch has metrics for Step Functions based on status

### When to use Step Functions?

- Pros
  - Visual workflow
  - Error handling
  - Audit
- Cons
  - Cost - $25 for 1M state transitions
- Scenarios
  - Business critical workflows - stuffs that make money. Eg: Payment, subscription - More
    robust error handling worth the premium
  - Complex workflows - Many states, branches, etc - visual workflow is a powerful design(for
    product) and diagnostic tool(for customer support)
  - Long running workflows - runs >15 mins - AWS discourages recursive Lambda functions. Step
    Functions gives you explicit branching checks, and can timeout at workflow level
  - Workflows within a bounded context of a single microservice are often orchestrated using a
    series of Lambda functions with Kinesis or SNS or SQS messages in between. Its good practice
    to use events to interact with different microservices together not within the same service.
    Because the workflow itself doesn't exist as a standalone concept anyway, but merely exists
    as the sum of a bunch of loosely connected functions with event sources. This makes the
    workflow to reason about and debug. we can't implement workflow level timeout as well. If you
    have such a system now, it should be moved to Step Functions

### 7 Types of States

#### Task

- Performs a task
- ```json
      "TaskState":{
        "Type":"Task",
        "Resource":"ARN",
        "Next":"AnotherTask",
        "TimeoutSeconds":"300",
        "ResultPath":"$.n"
      }
  ```
- ARN can be of Lambda, Activity, AWS Batch, ECS Task, DynamoDB, SNS, SQS, AWS Glue, SageMaker
- `TimeoutSeconds` - default is 60s. State machine doesn't know about the timeout of Lambda
  function. If TimeoutSeconds < Lambda function timeout, then this task will be timed out after
  TimeoutSeconds. so its good to set TimeoutSeconds = function's timeout
- If `ResultPath` is not specified, then the output from the state would bind to the $ symbol
  and override the current execution state. If we don't want this behaviour, you can bind the
  result to a path on the execution state, like, $.n

#### Pass

- Passes Input to Output without doing any work. It can modify the execution state.
- ```json
      "PassState":{
        "Type":"Pass",
        "Result":{
          "value" : 42
        },
        "ResultPath":"$.storeResult",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- `Result` - we can specify output for the pass state and we can say where to store the results
  in execution state using the `ResultPath` attribute. If the Pass state as empty Input, then
  the output will look like
  ```json
  {
    "storeResult": {
      "value": 42
    }
  }
  ```

#### Wait

- Wait before transitioning to next state
- Set the static value

- ```json
      "waitStateUsingSeconds":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "Seconds":10,
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- ```json
      "waitStateUsingTimeStamp":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "TimeStamp":"2021-07-14T01:59:00Z",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- To dynamically set the value
- ```json
      "waitStateUsingSeconds":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "SecondsPath":"$.waitTime",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- ```json
      "waitStateUsingTimeStamp":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "TimeStampPath":"$.waitUntil",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```

#### Choice

- Adds branching logic to the state machine

- ```json
      "choiceState": {
        "Type": "Choice",
        "Choices": [
          {
            "Variable": "$.name",
            "StringEquals": "Neo",
            "Next": "BlueTask"
          },
          {
            "Variable": "$.name",
            "StringEquals": "Alpha",
            "Next": "GreenTask"
          }
        ],
        "Default": "RedTask"
      }
  ```
- Using And

- ```json
      "choiceState": {
        "Type": "Choice",
        "Choices": [
          {
            "And": [
              {
                "Variable": "$.name",
                "StringEquals": "Neo"
              },
              {
                "Variable": "$.isRescued",
                "BooleanEquals": true
              }
            ],
            "Next": "BlueTask"
          }
        ],
        "Default": "RedTask"
      }
  ```

#### Parallel

- Performs tasks in Parallel
- The state will complete when all of the branches have finished or one of them have failed
- If any of the branches ends in a failure, then the whole Parallel state would end in Failed state

- ```json
  "parallelState": {
    "Type": "Parallel",
    "Branches": [
      {
        "StartAt": "Add",
        "States": {
          "Add": {
            "Type": "Task",
            "Resource": "ARN",
            "End": "true"
          }
        }
      }
    ],
    "Next": "RedTask"
  }
  ```

#### Succeed

- Terminates the State Machine execution successfully
- Task, Pass, Wait and Parallel - let us terminate the execution when they are complete but not
  the Choice state, in which case we might need to have a state that represents a successful
  termination for the execution. This is the purpose of Succeed State
- ```json
    "succeedState": {
      "Type": "Succeed"
      }
  ```

#### Fail

- Terminates the State Machine execution and mark it as failure
- We must specify an attribute `Error` and `Cause`
- Fail States are terminal state, so we can't specify additional state transition with `Next`
- ```json
    "failedState": {
      "Type": "Fail",
      "Error": "InvalidInput",
      "Cause": "Supplied Input is Invalid"
    }
  ```

### Managing Execution State

- The input to the state machine execution is bound to execution state $
- When the Lambda function is invoked, we get the current execution state $ as input in the
  function.
- The returned value from the function is updated to the execution state if `ResultPath` id
  defined in the state

- ```json
      "TaskState":{
        "Type":"Task",
        "Resource":"ARN",
        "InputPath":"$.n"
        "End": true
      }
  ```

- By default, the state gets the current execution state as its input. But we can be more
  selective by using `InputPath`. Here $.n selects only the attribute n from the current
  execution state

### Error Handling

- Retry failed states
- Catch any failures that could not be fixed by Retry or wasn't in the scope of Retry, then take
  to different path
- Retry and Catch are only allowed on **Task and Parallel States**
- Both Retry and Catch can be configured against specific error types and there many predefined
  errors
- Predefined error codes
  - States.ALL - matches any error
  - States.Timeout
  - States.TaskFailed
  - States.Permissions
  - States.ALL
- States may report errors with other names, which must not begin with the prefix `States`

- ```json
   "TaskState": {
     "Type": "Task",
     "Resource": "ARN",
     "Next": "AnotherTask",
     "TimeoutSeconds": "300",
     "ResultPath": "$.n",
     "Retry": [
       {
         "ErrorEquals": [
           "ErrorA",
           "ErrorB"
         ],
         "IntervalSeconds": 1,
         "BackoffRate": 2.0,
         "MaxAttempts": 2
       },
       {
         "ErrorEquals": [
           "ErrorC"
         ],
         "IntervalSeconds": 5,

       }
     ],
     "Catch": [
       {
         "ErrorEquals": [
           "States.ALL"
         ],
         "Next": "GoToFailHandlerTask"
       }
     ]
   }
  ```

- `MaxAttempts` - default is 3. If set 0, it will never retry
- Each `Retrier` in `Retry` keeps track of its own retry count
- The Error object returned from `Retrier` after the `MaxAttempts` and when there is a `Catch` for that Error, then the Error object becomes the `Output` of previous State and `Input` to the Next state mentioned in `Catch`.
- The Error object returned from `Retrier` after the `MaxAttempts` and when there is no `Catch`, then the Error object becomes the `Exception` of previous State and `Output` of previous State is Empty

### Service Limits

- Steps Functions has below Hard Limits
  - Max open executions - 1M
  - Max execution time - 1 year
  - Max execution history size - 25K events
  - Max execution idle time - 1 year
  - Max execution history retention time - 90 days
  - Max task execution time - 1 year
  - Max time step function keeps the task in Queue - 1 year
  - Max activity pollers per ARN - 1000 pollers
  - Max input or result data size for a task, state, or execution - 32KB
- Steps Functions has below Soft Limits
  - API limits on Step Function APIs. we can't make too many API requests in short time.
- If execution needs to be passed >32KB, then store the data in S3, DynamoDB,etc and pass the key
  to the state machine. The Lambda can fetch using the key

### Monitoring and Debugging

- CloudWatch metrics available and set alarms
- List of executions for a given state machine is available in Step Functions console
- Visualization tool, Execution Event History
- In CloudWatch Events, create a rule to automate an action when the execution failed or timeout or
  succeeded

### Express workflows

- Operates at higher throughput and
- Pros
  - Cost
  - Error Handling
- Cons
  - No Audit
  - No Visual tool
- [standard-vs-express](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/step-functions/latest/dg/concepts-standard-vs-express.html)

### Step Functions now supports AWS PrivateLink

- A Lambda function can be configured to access VPC resources. Even the Subnets and SGs can be
  selected for the function to use to setup the VPC configurations
- When we enable VPC for the function, it loses internet access by default. If Lambda function
  requires internet access, make sure the VPC has NAT Gateway and the SG associated with function
  has OutBound connections allowed
- AWS Private Link(VPC Endpoint) enables the services inside the VPC to connect to Step Functions
  without leaving the VPC. All the traffic are inside AWS network. The VPC endpoint is an ENI and so
  Security Group can be configured on it. This SG should allow inbound connections from Source SG to
  which the Lambda function has been configured.
- If Lambda still has issues in accessing the Step Functions, check NACL rules in the VPC. It
  should be configured to allow both inbound and outbound traffic
- Inorder to keep the traffic inside the AWS network, we can use VPC endpoint over NAT Gateway

### Deploying Step Functions

- Using Serverless Framework, AWS CloudFormation
- When SF(say, sf1 is added in serverless.yml) is deployed, it gets a unique ARN. The exeecutions of sf1 shows the Definitions of sf1 as well
- When new SF(say, sf2 is added and sf1 is removed from serverless.yml) is deployed, sf2 gets a unique ARN but it removes the sf1 and its executions which was deployed previously.
- When SF(say,sf2) is modified and deployed, sf2 retains the previous ARN but gets newly modified definition

Commit message:

Parallel State, Nested Parallel State, Wait State

step-functions.md, after:

# Step Functions

---

- It is a Orchestration Service that allows you to model workflows as state machine
- Manages the state of the workflow, keeps track of the execution, scalable and resilient
  platform.
- Design state machine using JSON. Refer the spec [states-language](https://states-language.net/)
- Multiple executions of same state machine can be executed concurrently
- Start state machine:
  - ```javascript 1.8
    StepFunctions.startExecution(req).promise();
    ```
  - API Gateway
  - CloudWatch Events
- The states in the state machine can invoke Lambda function
- Step Functions can record upto 25K events in Execution Event History per execution

### Terminology

- Every time the execution moves on from one state to another, it's called a **state transition**
- Step Functions charges based on number of state transitions across all your state machines, including retries.
- 4,000 free state transitions per month and does not automatically expire at the end of your 12 month AWS Free Tier term, and is available to both existing and new AWS customers indefinitely.
- $0.025 per 1,000 state transitions. $25 for 1M state transitions. $0.000025 PER STATE TRANSITION
  THEREAFTER
- State Machine Definition is the workflow created using JSON spec
- State Machine status:
  - Running
  - Succeeded
  - Failed
  - Timeout
  - Aborted
- Each state machine has an unique ARN and IAM role which is needed to interact with Lambda and
  other AWS services
- Each execution has an unique ARN, start time, end time, input and output, status
- Each state in the execution has a status:
  - Success
  - Failed
  - Cancelled
  - In Progress
- Each state displays input, output, exception if any
- Each state can have Retry, Catch, Timeout configured in the workflow
- CloudWatch has metrics for Step Functions based on status

### When to use Step Functions?

- Pros
  - Visual workflow
  - Error handling
  - Audit
- Cons
  - Cost - $25 for 1M state transitions
- Scenarios
  - Business critical workflows - stuffs that make money. Eg: Payment, subscription - More
    robust error handling worth the premium
  - Complex workflows - Many states, branches, etc - visual workflow is a powerful design(for
    product) and diagnostic tool(for customer support)
  - Long running workflows - runs >15 mins - AWS discourages recursive Lambda functions. Step
    Functions gives you explicit branching checks, and can timeout at workflow level
  - Workflows within a bounded context of a single microservice are often orchestrated using a
    series of Lambda functions with Kinesis or SNS or SQS messages in between. Its good practice
    to use events to interact with different microservices together not within the same service.
    Because the workflow itself doesn't exist as a standalone concept anyway, but merely exists
    as the sum of a bunch of loosely connected functions with event sources. This makes the
    workflow to reason about and debug. we can't implement workflow level timeout as well. If you
    have such a system now, it should be moved to Step Functions

### 7 Types of States

#### Task

- Performs a task
- ```json
      "TaskState":{
        "Type":"Task",
        "Resource":"ARN",
        "Next":"AnotherTask",
        "TimeoutSeconds":"300",
        "ResultPath":"$.n"
      }
  ```
- ARN can be of Lambda, Activity, AWS Batch, ECS Task, DynamoDB, SNS, SQS, AWS Glue, SageMaker
- `TimeoutSeconds` - default is 60s. State machine doesn't know about the timeout of Lambda
  function. If TimeoutSeconds < Lambda function timeout, then this task will be timed out after
  TimeoutSeconds. so its good to set TimeoutSeconds = function's timeout
- If `ResultPath` is not specified, then the output from the state would bind to the $ symbol
  and override the current execution state. If we don't want this behaviour, you can bind the
  result to a path on the execution state, like, $.n

#### Pass

- Passes Input to Output without doing any work. It can modify the execution state.
- ```json
      "PassState":{
        "Type":"Pass",
        "Result":{
          "value" : 42
        },
        "ResultPath":"$.storeResult",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- `Result` - we can specify output for the pass state and we can say where to store the results
  in execution state using the `ResultPath` attribute. If the Pass state as empty Input, then
  the output will look like
  ```json
  {
    "storeResult": {
      "value": 42
    }
  }
  ```

#### Wait

- Wait before transitioning to next state
- Set the static value
- Can wait for max 1 year

- ```json
      "waitStateUsingSeconds":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "Seconds":10,
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- ```json
      "waitStateUsingTimeStamp":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "TimeStamp":"2021-07-14T01:59:00Z",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- To dynamically set the value
- ```json
      "waitStateUsingSeconds":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "SecondsPath":"$.waitTime",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```
- ```json
      "waitStateUsingTimeStamp":{
        "Type":"Wait",
        "TimeStampPath":"$.waitUntil",
        "Next":"AnotherTask"
      }
  ```

#### Choice

- Adds branching logic to the state machine

- ```json
      "choiceState": {
        "Type": "Choice",
        "Choices": [
          {
            "Variable": "$.name",
            "StringEquals": "Neo",
            "Next": "BlueTask"
          },
          {
            "Variable": "$.name",
            "StringEquals": "Alpha",
            "Next": "GreenTask"
          }
        ],
        "Default": "RedTask"
      }
  ```
- Using And

- ```json
      "choiceState": {
        "Type": "Choice",
        "Choices": [
          {
            "And": [
              {
                "Variable": "$.name",
                "StringEquals": "Neo"
              },
              {
                "Variable": "$.isRescued",
                "BooleanEquals": true
              }
            ],
            "Next": "BlueTask"
          }
        ],
        "Default": "RedTask"
      }
  ```

#### Parallel

- Performs tasks in Parallel
- The state will complete when all of the branches have finished or one of them have failed
- - If any of the branches ends in a failure, it immediately "Cancels" the whole Parallel State, even if some of the branches are already in-progress/waiting. The states are marked as `Cancelled`
- If any of the branches ends in a failure, then the whole Parallel state would end in Failed state
- We can transition to the states within a specific branch of Parallel State. We can't transition from a branch to a state in another branch of Parallel State
- We can't duplicate the state names across the state machine. So state name should be unique.
- The output of Parallel State is combined output of all branches and collected into an array and follows the same order as the branches
- Parallel states can be nested

- ```json
  "parallelState": {
    "Type": "Parallel",
    "Branches": [
      {
        "StartAt": "Add",
        "States": {
          "Add": {
            "Type": "Task",
            "Resource": "ARN",
            "End": "true"
          }
        }
      }
    ],
    "Next": "RedTask"
  }
  ```

#### Succeed

- Terminates the State Machine execution successfully
- Task, Pass, Wait and Parallel - let us terminate the execution when they are complete but not
  the Choice state, in which case we might need to have a state that represents a successful
  termination for the execution. This is the purpose of Succeed State
- ```json
    "succeedState": {
      "Type": "Succeed"
      }
  ```

#### Fail

- Terminates the State Machine execution and mark it as failure
- We must specify an attribute `Error` and `Cause`
- Fail States are terminal state, so we can't specify additional state transition with `Next`
- ```json
    "failedState": {
      "Type": "Fail",
      "Error": "InvalidInput",
      "Cause": "Supplied Input is Invalid"
    }
  ```

### Managing Execution State

- The input to the state machine execution is bound to execution state $
- When the Lambda function is invoked, we get the current execution state $ as input in the
  function.
- The returned value from the function is updated to the execution state if `ResultPath` id
  defined in the state

- ```json
      "TaskState":{
        "Type":"Task",
        "Resource":"ARN",
        "InputPath":"$.n"
        "End": true
      }
  ```

- By default, the state gets the current execution state as its input. But we can be more
  selective by using `InputPath`. Here $.n selects only the attribute n from the current
  execution state

### Error Handling

- Retry failed states
- Catch any failures that could not be fixed by Retry or wasn't in the scope of Retry, then take
  to different path
- Retry and Catch are only allowed on **Task and Parallel States**
- Both Retry and Catch can be configured against specific error types and there many predefined
  errors
- Predefined error codes
  - States.ALL - matches any error
  - States.Timeout
  - States.TaskFailed
  - States.Permissions
  - States.ALL
- States may report errors with other names, which must not begin with the prefix `States`

- ```json
   "TaskState": {
     "Type": "Task",
     "Resource": "ARN",
     "Next": "AnotherTask",
     "TimeoutSeconds": "300",
     "ResultPath": "$.n",
     "Retry": [
       {
         "ErrorEquals": [
           "ErrorA",
           "ErrorB"
         ],
         "IntervalSeconds": 1,
         "BackoffRate": 2.0,
         "MaxAttempts": 2
       },
       {
         "ErrorEquals": [
           "ErrorC"
         ],
         "IntervalSeconds": 5,

       }
     ],
     "Catch": [
       {
         "ErrorEquals": [
           "States.ALL"
         ],
         "Next": "GoToFailHandlerTask"
       }
     ]
   }
  ```

- `MaxAttempts` - default is 3. If set 0, it will never retry
- Each `Retrier` in `Retry` keeps track of its own retry count
- The Error object returned from `Retrier` after the `MaxAttempts` and when there is a `Catch` for that Error, then the Error object becomes the `Output` of previous State and `Input` to the Next state mentioned in `Catch`.
- The Error object returned from `Retrier` after the `MaxAttempts` and when there is no `Catch`, then the Error object becomes the `Exception` of previous State and `Output` of previous State is Empty

### Service Limits

- Steps Functions has below Hard Limits
  - Max open executions - 1M
  - Max execution time - 1 year
  - Max execution history size - 25K events
  - Max execution idle time - 1 year
  - Max execution history retention time - 90 days
  - Max task execution time - 1 year
  - Max time step function keeps the task in Queue - 1 year
  - Max activity pollers per ARN - 1000 pollers
  - Max input or result data size for a task, state, or execution - 32KB
- Steps Functions has below Soft Limits
  - API limits on Step Function APIs. we can't make too many API requests in short time.
- If execution needs to be passed >32KB, then store the data in S3, DynamoDB,etc and pass the key
  to the state machine. The Lambda can fetch using the key

### Monitoring and Debugging

- CloudWatch metrics available and set alarms
- List of executions for a given state machine is available in Step Functions console
- Visualization tool, Execution Event History
- In CloudWatch Events, create a rule to automate an action when the execution failed or timeout or
  succeeded

### Express workflows

- Operates at higher throughput and
- Pros
  - Cost
  - Error Handling
- Cons
  - No Audit
  - No Visual tool
- [standard-vs-express](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/step-functions/latest/dg/concepts-standard-vs-express.html)

### Step Functions now supports AWS PrivateLink

- A Lambda function can be configured to access VPC resources. Even the Subnets and SGs can be
  selected for the function to use to setup the VPC configurations
- When we enable VPC for the function, it loses internet access by default. If Lambda function
  requires internet access, make sure the VPC has NAT Gateway and the SG associated with function
  has OutBound connections allowed
- AWS Private Link(VPC Endpoint) enables the services inside the VPC to connect to Step Functions
  without leaving the VPC. All the traffic are inside AWS network. The VPC endpoint is an ENI and so
  Security Group can be configured on it. This SG should allow inbound connections from Source SG to
  which the Lambda function has been configured.
- If Lambda still has issues in accessing the Step Functions, check NACL rules in the VPC. It
  should be configured to allow both inbound and outbound traffic
- Inorder to keep the traffic inside the AWS network, we can use VPC endpoint over NAT Gateway

### Deploying Step Functions

- Using Serverless Framework, AWS CloudFormation
- When SF(say, sf1 is added in serverless.yml) is deployed, it gets a unique ARN. The exeecutions of sf1 shows the Definitions of sf1 as well
- When new SF(say, sf2 is added and sf1 is removed from serverless.yml) is deployed, sf2 gets a unique ARN but it removes the sf1 and its executions which was deployed previously.
- When SF(say,sf2) is modified and deployed, sf2 retains the previous ARN but gets newly modified definition
